CHAPTER IX.
Under the appellation of Roger Chillingworth, the reader will remember, was hidden another
name, which its former wearer had resolved should never more be spoken.
It has been related how, in the crowd that witnessed Hester Prynne's ignominious exposure,
stood a man, elderly, travel-worn, who, just emerging from the perilous wilderness, beheld
the woman, in whom he hoped to find embodied the warmth and cheerfulness of home, set up
as a type of sin before the people.
Her matrimonial frame was trodden under all men's feet.
Infamy was babbling around her in the public marketplace.
For her kindred, should the tidings ever reach them, and for the companions of her unspotted
life, there remained nothing but the contagion of her dishonor, which would not fail to be
distributed in strict accordance and proportion with the intimacy and sacredness of their
previous relationship.
Then why, since a choice was with themself, should the individual, whose connection with
fallen woman had been the most intimate and sacred of them all, come forward to vindicate
his claim to an inheritance so little desirable?
He resolved not to be pilloried beside her on the pedestal of shame.
Unknown to all but Hester Prynne, and possessing the lock and key of her silence, he chose
to withdraw his name from the role of mankind, and, as regarded his former ties and interests,
to vanish out of life as completely as if he indeed lay at the bottom of the ocean,
with a rumor had long ago consigned him.
This purpose, once effected, new interests would immediately spring up, and likewise
a new purpose, dark, it is true, if not guilty, but of force enough to engage the full strength
of his faculties.
In pursuance of this resolve, he took up his residence in the Puritan town as Roger Chillingworth,
without other introduction than the learning and intelligence of which he possessed more
than a common measure.
As his studies, at a previous period of his life, had made him extensively acquainted
with the medical science of the day, it was as a physician that he presented himself,
and as such was cordially received.
Skillful men of the medical and chirurgical profession were of rare occurrence in the
colony.
They seldom, it would appear, partook of the religious zeal that brought other emigrants
across the Atlantic.
In their researches into the human frame, it may be that the higher and more subtle
faculties of such men were materialized, and that they lost the spiritual view of
existence amid the intricacies of that wondrous mechanism which seemed to involve art enough
to comprise all of life within itself.
At all events, the health of the good town of Boston, so far as medicine had ought to
do with it, had hitherto lain in the guardianship of an aged deacon and apothecary whose piety
and godly deportment were stronger testimonials in his favor than any that he could have produced
in the shape of a diploma.
The only surgeon was one who combined the occasional exercise of that noble art with
the daily and habitual flourish of a razor.
To such a professional body, Roger Chillingworth was a brilliant acquisition.
He soon manifested his familiarity with the ponderous and imposing machinery of antique
physics in which every remedy contained a multitude of far-fetched and heterogeneous
has elaborately compounded as if the proposed result had been the elixir of life.
In his Indian captivity, moreover, he had gained much knowledge of the properties of
native herbs and roots, nor did he conceal from his patients that these simple medicines,
nature's boon to the untutored savage, had quite as large a share of his own confidence
as the European pharmacopoeia, with so many learned doctors, had spent centuries in elaborating.
This learned stranger was exemplary as regarded at least the outward forms of a religious
life, and early after his arrival had chosen for a spiritual guide the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale.
The young divine, whose scholar-like renown still lived in Oxford, was considered by his
more fervent admirers as little less than a heavenly ordained apostle, destined, should
he live and labor for the ordinary term of life to do as great deeds for the now feeble
New England Church as the early Fathers had achieved for the infancy of the Christian
faith.
About this period, however, the health of Mr. Dimmesdale had evidently begun to fail.
By those best acquainted with his habits, the paleness of the young minister's cheek
was accounted for by his too earnest devotion to study, his scrupulous fulfillment of parochial
duty, and more than all to the fasts and vigils of which he made a frequent practice
in order to keep the grossness of this earthly state from clogging and obscuring his spiritual
lamp.
Some declared that if Mr. Dimmesdale were really going to die, it was cause enough that
the world was not worthy to be any longer trodden by his feet.
He himself, on the other hand, with characteristic humility, avowed his belief that if Providence
to remove him, it would be because of his own unworthiness to perform its humblest mission
here on earth.
With all this difference of opinion as the cause of his decline, there could be no question
of the fact.
His form grew emaciated, his voice, though still rich and sweet, had a certain melancholy
prophecy of decay in it.
He was often observed, on any slight alarm or other sudden accident, to put his hand
over his heart, with first a flush and then a paleness, indicative of pain.
Such was the young clergyman's condition, and so imminent the prospect that his dawning
light would be extinguished all untimely when Roger Chillingworth made his advent to the
town.
His first entry on the scene, few people could tell whence, dropping down, as it were, out
of the sky or starting from the nether earth, had an aspect of mystery which was easily
heightened to the miraculous.
He was now known to be a man of skill.
It was observed that he gathered herbs and the blossoms of wildflowers, and dug up roots
and plucked off twigs from the forest trees like one acquainted with hidden virtues in
what was valueless to common eyes.
He was heard to speak of Sir Kenneth Dinkby and other famous men, whose scientific attainments
were esteemed hardly less than supernatural, as having been his correspondents or associates.
Why was such rank in the learned world had he come hither?
What could he, whose fear was in great cities, be seeking in the wilderness?
In answer to this query, a rumor gained ground, and however absurd, was entertained by some
very sensible people, that heaven had wrought an absolute miracle by transporting an eminent
doctor of physics from a German university bodily through the air and setting him down
at the door of Mr. Dimmesdale's study.
Individuals of wiser faith, indeed, who knew that heaven promotes its purposes without
aiming at the stage effect of what is called miraculous interposition, were inclined to
see a providential hand in Roger Chillingworth's so opportune arrival.
This idea was countenanced by the strong interest which the physician ever manifested in the
young clergyman.
He attached himself to him as a parishioner, and sought to win a friendly regard and confidence
from his naturally reserved sensibility.
He expressed great alarm at his pastor's state of health, but was anxious to attempt
the cure, and if early undertaken, seemed not despondent of a favorable result.
The elders, the deacons, the motherly dames, and the young and fair maidens of Mr. Dimmesdale's
flock were alike importunate that he should make trial of the physician's frankly offered
skill.
Mr. Dimmesdale gently repelled their entreaties.
I need no medicine, said he.
But how could the young minister say so, when with every successive Sabbath his cheek was
paler and thinner, and his voice more tremulous than before, when it had now become a constant
habit rather than a casual gesture to press his hand over his heart?
Was he weary of his labors?
Did he wish to die?
These questions were solemnly propounded to Mr. Dimmesdale by the elder ministers of
Boston and the deacons of his church, who, to use their own phrase, dealt with him on
the sin of rejecting the aid which Providence so manifestly held out.
He listened in silence, and finally promised to confer with the physician.
Were it God's will, said the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, when, in fulfillment of this pledge,
he requested old Roger Chillingworth's professional advice, I could well be content that my labors
and my sorrows and my sins and my pains should shortly end with me.
And what is earthly of them to be buried in my grave, and the spiritual go with me to
my eternal state, rather than that you should put your skill to the proof in my behalf?
Ah, replied Roger Chillingworth, with that quietness, which, whether imposed or natural,
marked all his deportment, it is thus that a young clergyman is apt to speak.
Youthful men, not having taken a deep route, give up their hold of life so easily, and
saintly men who walk with God on earth would fain be away to walk with him on the golden
pavements of the New Jerusalem.
Nay, rejoined the young minister, putting his hand to his heart with a flush of pain
flitting over his brow, were I worthier to walk there, I could be better content to toil
here.
Good men ever interpret themselves too meanly, said the physician.
In this manner, the mysterious old Roger Chillingworth became the medical advisor of the Reverend
Mr. Dimmesdale.
As not only the disease interested the physician, but he was strongly moved to look into the
character and qualities of the patient, these two men, so different in age, came gradually
to spend much time together.
For the sake of the minister's health, and to enable the leech to gather plants with
healing balm in them, they took long walks on the seashore, or in the forest, mingling
various walks with the splash and murmur of the waves and the solemn wind anthem among
the treetops.
Often, likewise, one was a guest of the other in his place of study and retirement.
There was a fascination for the minister in the company of the man of science, in whom
he recognized an intellectual cultivation of no moderate depth or scope, together with
a range and freedom of ideas that he would have vainly looked for among the members of
his own profession.
In truth, he was startled, if not shocked, to find this attribute in the physician.
Mr. Dimmesdale was a true priest, a true religionist, with a reverential sentiment largely developed,
and an order of mind that impelled itself powerfully along the track of a creed and
more its passage continually deeper with the lapse of time.
In no state of society would he have been what is called a man of liberal views.
It would always be essential to his piece to feel the pressure of a faith about him,
support him, while it confined him with its iron framework.
Not the less, however, though with a tremulous enjoyment, did he feel the occasional relief
of looking at the universe through the medium of another kind of intellect than those with
which he habitually held converse.
It was as if a window were thrown open, admitting a freer atmosphere into the close and stifled
study, whereas life was wasting itself away amid lamp light or obstructed by day beams,
and the musty fragrance, be it sensual or moral, that exhales from books.
But the air was too fresh and chill to be long-breathed with comfort, so the minister
and the physician with him withdrew again within the limits of what their church defined
as orthodox.
Thus Roger Chillingworth scrutinized his patient carefully, both as he saw him in his ordinary
life, keeping an accustomed pathway in the range of thoughts familiar to him, and as
he appeared when thrown amidst other moral scenery, the novelty of which might call out
something new to the surface of his character.
He deemed it essential, it would seem, to know the man before attempting to do him good.
Wherever there is a heart and an intellect, the diseases of the physical frame are tinged
with the peculiarity of these.
In Arthur Dimmesdale, thought and imagination were so active and sensibility so intense
that the bodily infirmity would be likely to have its groundwork there.
So Roger Chillingworth, the man of skill, the kind and friendly physician, strove to
go deep into his patient's bosom, delving among his principles, prying into his recollections,
and probing everything with a cautious touch, like a treasure-seeker in a dark cavern.
Few secrets can escape an investigator who has an opportunity and license to undertake
such a quest, and skill to follow it up.
A man burdened with a secret should especially avoid the intimacy of his physician.
If the latter possess native sagacity and a nameless something more, let us call it intuition.
If he show no intrusive egotism nor disagreeable prominent characteristics of his own, if he
have the power, which must be borne with him, to bring his mind into such affinity with
his patients that this last shall unawares have spoken what he imagines of self only
to have thought.
If such revelations be received without tumult and acknowledged, not so often by an uttered
sympathy as by silence and inarticulate breath, and here and there are word to indicate that
all is understood, if to these qualifications of a confidant be joined the advantages afforded
by his recognized character as a physician, then, at some inevitable moment, will the
soul of the sufferer be dissolved and flow forth in a dark but transparent stream, bringing
all its mysteries into the daylight.
Roger Chillingworth possessed all or most of the attributes above enumerated.
Nevertheless, time went on.
A kind of intimacy, as we have said, grew up between these two cultivated minds, which
had as wide a field as the whole sphere of human thought and study to meet upon.
They discussed every topic of ethics and religion, of public affairs and private character,
they talked much on both sides of matters that seemed personal to themselves, and yet
no secret, such as the physician fancied must exist there, ever stole out of the minister's
consciousness into his companion's ear.
The latter had his suspicions, indeed, that even the nature of Mr. Dimmesdale's bodily
disease had never been fairly revealed to him.
It was a strange reserve.
After a time, at a hint from Roger Chillingworth, the friends of Mr. Dimmesdale affected an
arrangement by which the two were lodged in the same house, so that every ebb and flow
of the minister's life-tide might pass on to the eye of his anxious and attached physician.
There was much joy throughout the town when this greatly desirable object was attained.
It was held to be the best possible measure for the young clergyman's welfare, unless,
indeed, as often urged by such as felt authorized to do so, he had selected one of the many
blooming damsels, spiritually devoted to him, to become his devoted wife.
This latter step, however, there was no present prospect that Arthur Dimmesdale would be
prevailed upon to take.
He rejected all suggestions of the kind, as if priestly celibacy were one of his articles
of church discipline.
Doomed by his own choice, therefore, as Mr. Dimmesdale so evidently was, to eat his unsavory
morsel always at another's board, and endure the life-long chill which must be his lot,
who seeks to warm himself only at another's fireside, it truly seemed that this sagacious,
experienced, benevolent old physician, with his concord of paternal and reverential love
for the young pastor, was the very man of all mankind to be constantly within reach
of his voice.
The new abode of the two friends was with a pious widow of good social rank who
dwelt in a house covering pretty nearly the site on which the venerable structure of King's
Chapel has since been built.
It had the graveyard, originally Isaac Johnson's home field, on one side, and so was well
adapted to call up serious reflections suited to their respective employments in both
minister and man of physics.
The motherly care of the good widow assigned to Mr. Dimmesdale a front apartment with a
sunny exposure and heavy window curtains to create noontide shadow when desirable.
The walls were hung round with tapestry, said to be from the goblin looms, and at all events,
representing the scriptural story of David in Bathsheba and Nathan the prophet, in colors
still unfaded, but which made the fair woman of the scene almost as grimly picturesque as a woe
denouncing seer.
Here the pale clergyman piled up his library, rich with parchment-bound folios of the Fathers
and the lore of the rabbis and monkish erudition of which the Protestant divines, even while they
vilified and decried that class of writers, were yet constrained often to avail themselves.
On the other side of the house, old Roger Chillingworth arranged his study and laboratory.
Not such as a modern man of science would reckon even tolerably complete, but provided with a
distilling apparatus and the means of compounding drugs and chemicals which the practiced alchemist
knew well how to turn to purpose.
With such commodiousness of situation, these two learned persons set themselves down, each in his
own domain, yet familiarly passing from one apartment to the other, and bestowing a mutual
and not incurious inspection into one another's business.
And the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale's best discerning friends, as we have intimated,
very reasonably imagined that the hand of Providence had done all this for the purpose,
besought in so many public and domestic and secret prayers of restoring the young minister to health.
But, it must now be said, another portion of the community had latterly begun to take its own view
of the relation betwixt Mr. Dimmesdale and the mysterious old physician.
When an uninstructed multitude attempts to see with its eyes, it is exceedingly apt to be deceived.
When, however, it forms its judgment, as it usually does, on the intuitions of its great and
warm heart, the conclusions thus attained are often so profound and so unerring as to
possess the character of truth supernaturally revealed.
The people, in the case of which we speak, could justify its prejudice against Roger Chillingworth
by no fact or argument worthy of serious refutation.
There was an aged handicraftsman, it is true, who had been a citizen of London at the period
of Sir Thomas Overby's murder, now some thirty years ago on. He testified to having seen the
physician, under some other name, which the narrator of the story had now forgotten,
in company with Dr. Foreman, the famous old conjurer who was implicated in the affair of
Overbury. Two or three individuals hinted that the man of skill during his Indian captivity
had enlarged his medical attainments by joining in the incantations of the savage priests
who were universally acknowledged to be powerful enchanters, often performing
seemingly miraculous cures by their skill in the black art.
A large number, and many of these were persons of such sober sense and practical observation
that their opinions would have been valuable in other matters,
affirmed that Roger Chillingworth's aspect had undergone a remarkable change while he
dwelt in town, and especially since his abode with Mr. Dimmesdale. At first, his expression had
been calm, meditative, scholar-like. Now there was something ugly and evil in his face, which they
had not previously noticed, and which grew still the more obvious to sight the oftener they looked
upon him. According to the vulgar idea, the fire in his laboratory had been brought from the lower
regions, and was fed with infernal fuel, and so, as might be expected, his visage was getting
sooty with the smoke. To sum up the matter, it grew to be a widely diffused opinion that
Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale, like many other personages of special sanctity in all ages of
the Christian world, was haunted either by Satan himself or by Satan's emissary in the guise of
divine permission for a season to burrow into the clergyman's intimacy and plot against his soul.
No sensible man, it was confessed, could doubt on which side the victor would turn.
The people looked, with an unshaken hope, to see the minister come forth out of the conflict
transfigured with the glory which he would unquestionably win. Meanwhile, nevertheless,
it was sad to think of the perchance mortal agony through which he must struggle toward his triumph.
Alas, to judge from the gloom and terror in the depth of the poor minister's eyes,
the battle was a sore one, and the victory anything but secure.